sports
sports
Review
Resistance Exercise for Improving Running Economy and
Running BiomechanicsRunningBiomechanics and Decreasing Running-Related Injury
Exercise
Improving Running Economy
Risk: A Narrative Review
Decreasing Running-Related Injury
Risk: A Narrative Review
Anja Šuc 1, Pija Šarko 1, Jernej Pleša 1 and Žiga Kozinc 1,2,*
Ziga Kozinc
1,2,%
1
2
*
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Primorska, Polje 42, SI-6310 Izola, Slovenia;
97210493@student.upr.si (A.Š.); 97210482@student.upr.si (P.Š.); 97200425@student.upr.si (J.P.)
Faculty
Health Sciences,
of Primorska, Polje
SI-6310 Izola, Slovenia;
97210493@student.upr.si (A.5.); 97210482@student.upr.si (PS.); 97200425@student.upr.si (J-P.)
Andrej Marušiˇ
c Institute, University of Primorska, Muzejski trg 2, SI-6000 Koper, Slovenia
Andrej Maru8ié Institute, University of Primorska, Muzejski trg 2, SI-6000 Koper, Slovenia
Correspondence: ziga.kozinc@fvz.upr.si
Correspondence: ziga.kozinc@fvz.upr.si
Abstract: It is well-accepted that at least a certain amount of resistance exercise (RE) is recommended
for most endurance athletes. In this review, we aim to summarize the evidence regarding the effects
of RE on running economy, running biomechanics, and running-related injury risk in endurance
runners. The evidence robustly shows that lower limb RE is effective for improving running economy
and performance, with a combination of strength and plyometric training being recommended to
improve RE. Isometric training is also emerging as a possible alternative to implement during periods
of high overall training load. Lower limb RE may change some aspects of joint kinematics during
running; however, the evidence regarding the effects on kinetics is limited. Lower limb RE may help
reduce running-related injury risk, but further evidence is needed.
is well-accepted that
endurance athletes.
this review,
resistance exercise (RE)
recommended
summarize
evidence regarding
RE on running economy, running biomechanics, and running-related injury risk
runners. The evidence robustly shows
and performance, with a combination
lower
RE is effective
effects
endurance
improving running economy
strength and plyometric training being recommended
improve RE. Isometric training is also emerging
high overall training load. Lower limb RE
a possible alternative
change some aspects
running; however,
evidence regarding the effects
kinetics is limited. Lower limb RE
reduce running-related injury risk,
check for
updates
Citation: Šuc, A.; Šarko, P.; Pleša, J.;
Kozinc, Ž. Resistance Exercise for
Suc, A.; Sarko, P;; Ple%a, J.;
Kozine, Z. Resistance Exercise
Improving Running Economy
Improving Running Economy and
Running Biomechanics and
Running Biomechanics and
Decreasing Running-Related Injury
Risk:
Decreasing Running-Related Injury
Risk: A Narrative Review. Sports
2022, 10, 98. https://doi.org/
10.3390/sports10070098
Narrative Review. Sports
2022, 10,98.
https://doi.org/
10.3390/sports10070098
Academic Editor: Gregory
C. Bogdanis
Academic Editor: Gregory
C. Bogdanis
Received: 31 May 2022
Accepted: 22 June 2022
Published: 24 June 2022
31 May 2022
Accepted: 22 June 2022
Published: 24 June 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
le\ —G)
or
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.
1. Introduction
The utilityTheutility of resistance exercise (RE) for endurance athletes has been a matter of
resistance exercise (RE)
debate among sport scientists
endurance athletes has
debate among sport scientists for a long time.
a long time. Today,
Today, it is well-accepted that at least a
is well-accepted
least
certain amount of RE is recommended for most endurance athletes. In this paper, we focus
on the evidence regarding the effects of RE for endurance runners. We address the effect of
RE on running economy, running biomechanics, and injury risk.
certain amount
recommended
the evidence regarding
effects
RE
endurance athletes. In this paper,
endurance runners. We address
RE on running economy, running biomechanics,
injury risk.
Highly trained endurance runners normally have similar and very high
V˙O2max
Highly trained endurance runners normally have similar and very high VO.max
|
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel,
authors.
Strcii,
acct,
Switzerland.
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
dirwirstia
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
wngizs
the
in2
terms
tess
and
conaiuons or me Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Cob
4n
tet
db
at ts by/
Uwitzerland.
Lupyiagaus © 2022 by
Licorice
Tig oboe ow et Sees. elit article
values (70–80 mL/kg/min with relatively small variations between athletes [1,2]); therefore,
their performance depends in large part on their running economy [3]. Running economy
is deﬁned as the amount of oxygen consumed ( ˙VO2) at a given submaximal running speed
and is expressed in mL/kg−1/min−1 [4]. Simply put, at a given speed, a runner with a
better running economy consumes less oxygen compared to a runner with a lower running
economy [5]. Studies typically report a very strong correlation between running economy
and endurance running performance (r = 0.8–0.9) [6]. A plethora of modiﬁable determinants
of running economy have been reported, including stride length, stride rates, contact times,
lower vertical oscillation, greater leg stiffness, lower limb kinematics, alignment of the
ground reaction force and lower limb axis during the propulsive phase, arm swing, lower
coactivation, and ﬁrm footwear [7–9]. In addition, several anthropometric characteristics
such as height, limb dimensions, and body composition have been suggested to inﬂuence
running economy [10]. In relation to this article, neuromuscular properties such as muscle
strength, elastic energy utilization, eccentric power, and leg muscle stiffness are of primary
interest [11]. The reutilization of elastic energy is a mechanism that can substantially reduce
energy consumption during running [12]. The ability to reuse elastic energy during the
propulsive phase of the running cycle is determined by reactive strength and leg musclelegmuscle
stiffness [7,13]. Reactive strength is the ability of the musculoskeletal system to produce a
athletes [1,2]); therefore,
defined
is expressed
submaximal running speed
mL/kg~!/min™! [4]. Simply put,
better running economy consumes less oxygen compared
a given speed,
runner with a
economy [5]. Studies typically report a very strong correlation
and
running performance
0.8-0.9) [6].
running economy have been reported, including
plethora
runner with
running
running economy
modifiable determinants
length, stride rates, contact times,
lower
oscillation, greater leg stiffness, lower limb kinematics, alignment
ground reaction force
lower limb axis during
propulsive phase,
swing, lower
coactivation,
such as
firm footwear [7-9].
limb dimensions,
running economy [10].
relation
strength, elastic energy utilization,
interest [11]. The reutilization
energy consumption during running [12].
propulsive phase
running cycle
stiffness [7,13]. Reactive strength
ability
addition, several anthropometric characteristics
body
have been suggested
this article, neuromuscular properties such
power, and leg
energy
ability
that
stiffness are
influence
muscle
primary
substantially reduce
reuse elastic energy during
by reactive strength
system
produce
performance depends
large part
running economy [3]. Running economy
oxygen consumed (VO3)
values (70-80 mL/kg/min with relatively small variations
focus
effect
1. Introduction
further evidence is needed.
Keywords: runners; biomechanics; training; prevention; exercise
Keywords: runners; biomechanics; training; prevention; exercise
periods
joint kinematics during
help
Anja Suc 1, Pija Sarko 1, Jernej Plea!
Sports 2022, 10, 98. https://doi.org/10.3390/sports10070098
‘ loi.org/10.3390/sports10070098
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sports
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sports

Sports 2022, 10, 98
2 of 16
large force with concentric contraction immediately after rapid eccentric contraction, also
known as eccentric–concentric contraction or the stretch–shortening cycle (SSC) [14].
Muscle stiffness is deﬁned as the ability of a system to resist deformation and is
calculated as the ratio of the force produced to the change in muscle length. It represents
the integrative action of muscles, tendons, and ligaments that work together as a spring
that stores and reuses elastic force [15]. The greater the muscle stiffness, the less muscle
activation is required to transfer energy during running, thus reducing energy expenditure
and improving running economy [16]. Stiffness on the muscle level is difﬁcult to assess
during dynamic tasks, such as running. Consequently, studies have typically calculated
quasi-stiffness, which is deﬁned as the ability of the human body to resist displacement [17].
For instance, vertical quasi-stiffness is deﬁned as the ratio between changes in the ground
reaction force and vertical displacement of the center of mass, while joint quasi-stiffness
describes the angular displacement within a joint in relation to joint moments [18,19]. RE
can increase reactive strength and quasi-stiffness (although the results on directly measured
muscle stiffness are inconclusive [20]). The increase in quasi-stiffness is one of the primary
candidates for underlying the improvement in running economy after RE [21], which is
also corroborated by simulation studies demonstrating that a decrease in stiffness results in
increased energy expenditure during running [22].
Everything else being equal, stiffness is inversely related to ﬂexibility; thus, it is not
surprising that studies have shown an inverse relationship between ﬂexibility and running
economy [23,24]. On the other hand, it seems that if muscle stiffness is preserved after
stretching intervention, running economy is not affected [25]. Given that sufﬁcient range of
motion (particularly at the hip and ankle joints) is needed for optimal running technique,
performing some ﬂexibility exercises in addition to RE could be beneﬁcial. The interested
reader is referred to the review paper on the acute and chronic effects of stretching on
running economy by Carter et al. [25].
The incidence of running-related injuries ranges between 3% and 85% [26]. The ma-
jority of these injuries are overuse/chronic [27], with the highest incidence reported for
iliotibial band syndrome (ITBS), patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS), Achilles tendinitis,
plantar fasciitis, and medial tibial stress syndrome [28]. According to Troy et al. [29], sub-
optimal biomechanics results in an uneven distribution of forces between body segments.
This is seen particularly in people with PFPS and ITBS, where unevenly distributed forces
increase stress on a particular part of a structure [30,31]. One study demonstrated that
PFPS is associated with weak muscles that control the hip and muscles that regulate pelvic
movement and external knee rotation [32]. Additionally, abnormal biomechanics has also
been observed in these individuals. A similar ﬁnding was found in runners with ITBS, in
whom increased internal knee rotation and increased hip displacement were observed [33].
RE seems to be a promising tool to improve running economy and potentially for
strengthening the weakened muscles that cause altered biomechanics and, by extension,
increased injury risk. Therefore, the purpose of this narrative review is to summarize the
evidence of the effect of RE on running economy, running biomechanics, and running-
related injury risk. Systematic reviews to date have generally shown that RE improves
running economy [34]; however, most of the recent reviews focused only on the effects
of strength training in highly trained runners [35], such as concurrent heavy weight and
explosive training [36]. Existing reviews on running biomechanics and injury-risk typically
focus on multiple interventions or interventions other than RE [37–40]. The purpose of this
paper is to summarize, in a narrative manner, the available evidence on effects of different
RE modalities for different domains of application related to running. We believe that
this paper will outline speciﬁc gaps in the literature and also help coaches and clinicians
who work with runners to design RE programs for speciﬁc purposes and goals. A search
of the literature was performed in January 2022. The following keywords were used
in various combinations in PubMed and Scopus databases: running, runners, running-
related, injury, biomechanics, performance, and economy. Upon retrieval of the relevant full
texts, potentially useful references were retrieved from the reference lists of the included

Sports 2022, 10, 98
3 of 16
articles. Both reviews and original research were considered. Studies were included if they
analyzed runners, triathletes, or military personnel. Studies were excluded if the article was
written in a language other than English. Although we primarily searched for randomized
controlled trials and other experimental study types (i.e., assessing the effects of RE on
running economy, running biomechanics, and injury-risk), we also included cross-sectional
studies into the narrative where appropriate.
2. Resistance Exercise for Improving Running Economy and Performance
Running performance on middle and long distances depends on anthropometric,
biomechanical, and physiological characteristics [41]. In his endurance performance model,
Joyner considered three key physiological parameters— ˙VO2max, blood lactate concentra-
tion, and running economy [42]. Paavolainen et al. suggested that among well-trained
distance runners, running economy is a better predictor of performance than ˙VO2max [43].
A recent systematic review showed improvements of running economy without changes in
V˙O2max and blood lactate concentration in pre-trained athletes after RE intervention [41].
However, the results between studies differed considerably, which can be attributed to
different running speeds being used for running economy assessments and other inconsis-
tencies in the measurement protocols [41]. Di Prampero et al. demonstrated that runners
improved running economy more while running at competitive speed [44]. After 8 weeks
of concurrent explosive strength training and endurance training, young runners improved
their anaerobic and neuromuscular properties without reducing their aerobic capacity [45].
An older systematic review supports these ﬁndings with improved running economy (+8%)
in elite long-distance runners after explosive strength training. However, in untrained run-
ners, that was not the case, as they improved only in
V˙O2max [46]. In competitive runners,
even a small improvement in running economy can have a major impact on long-distance
running performance, especially in marathons and ultramarathons [46].
Cross-sectional evidence shows that muscle strength and quasi-stiffness are positively
related to running economy, which supports the use of RE to improve running economy.
Li et al. [47] studied the relationship between the neuromuscular properties of the lower
extremities and running economy at three different speeds (12, 14, and 16 km/h). Running
economy at 12, 14, and 16 km/h was signiﬁcantly affected by eccentric strength in leg
press (r = 0.52–0.63), as well as reactive strength (r = 0.41–0.57) and leg quasi-stiffness
(r = 0.68–0.76), determined from drop jump testing. During eccentric contractions, the
muscle–tendon unit is stretched, absorbing mechanical energy, which is then reused dur-
ing concentric contractions [48]. As mentioned before, the action of stretching, which is
immediately followed by muscle contraction, has been termed as the stretch–shortening
cycle (SSC). During the SSC, the muscle works as a spring and is able to produce more
force in the concentric action (compared to concentric movement alone), which is crucial
for running economy [48]. Up to a 50% increase in force can occur due to energy reuse
during SSC actions [49]. These research ﬁndings describe potential underlying mechanisms
of improvement in running economy and performance after RE in endurance runners. In
the following sections, the effects of speciﬁc RE modalities are discussed.
Although some forms of RE may elicit hypertrophic effects and consequently lead to
an increase in body mass, such an effect has not been shown in most studies conducted on
runners. Docherty & Sporer [50] described the concept of the interference phenomenon
between concurrent endurance training and RE. Based on their review of the literature,
simultaneously training for strength and endurance compromises the development of
muscle strength (as compared to using only RE). However, the development of endurance
(speciﬁcally aerobic power) appears to be unaffected by concurrent RE, which supports
its use for endurance athletes. The fact that the body mass is unchanged in most RE
intervention studies is important to point out, as the effect of RE could also be accompanied
by an increased muscle mass and thus increased total body mass, which could negatively
affect the relative physiological determinants of endurance, such as running economy
and ˙VO2max [51]. Li et al. [11] studied the impact of complex training, which included

Sports 2022, 10, 98
4 of 16
maximum strength training and plyometric training, on running economy and came to the
same conclusion. Namely, body composition did not change with training, which indicated
that the adjustment to resistance training was mainly due to adaptations on the level of the
nervous system (e.g., increased frequency of motor unit ﬁring and increased recruitment of
motor units) [52].
2.1. Strength Training
Five studies included in a recent systematic review [35] reported a positive effect of
strength training on running economy in highly trained endurance runners. The duration
of the interventions ranged from 8 to 12 weeks, with one study using high loads (85%
1RM) and the other four using moderate loads (40–70% 1RM). The addition of RE to
the endurance training of well-trained endurance runners improved running economy
(+4%) after 10 weeks without changes in body mass and ˙VO2 [53]. In addition, an 8-week
intervention of heavy weight training on well-trained endurance runners improved running
economy (+5%) and postponed the time to exhaustion, while no changes in body mass were
reported [54]. A study by Beattie et al. [51] performed on endurance runners also found
that RE performed in addition to endurance training improved running economy and
V˙O2max without signiﬁcant changes in body composition, which was also replicated in
other research [41,55]. A recent study [55] found similar results in triathletes, who improved
their maximal strength, cycling economy, and running economy in a 26-week concurrent
endurance and RE program. Additionally, Alcaraz-Ibañez and Rodríguez-Pérez [41] found
no signs of overtraining when RE was added onto the training schedule of previously
trained endurance athletes. However, there were inconsistencies in improvements among
athletes, which might be a consequence of different characteristics of the applied RE.
2.2. Plyometric Training
Several studies have also investigated the effects of plyometric training on running
economy. A 9-week intervention of plyometric training in highly trained distance runners
improved running economy at 18 km/h−1 (+4.1%; p = 0.02), accompanied by trends for
improved 5-jump plyometric test performance (+14.7%; p = 0.11) and a lower VO2max–
speed slope (14%; p = 0.120) [56]. A 6-week plyometric training intervention improved
running economy, CMJ height, 5-jump plyometric test performance, and lower leg quasi-
stiffness [57]. Importantly, the increase in quasi-stiffness was correlated with improvements
in running economy. Increasing lower leg quasi-stiffness and reactive strength through ply-
ometric training enables better utilization of the SSC [11,57]. Interestingly, Turner et al. [58]
reported that moderately trained endurance runners improved running economy after
6 weeks of plyometric training; however, there was no improvement in vertical jump
performance. This could have been due to the shorter duration of the plyometric training
(10–15 min), which was not primarily focused on improving vertical jumping performance.
In a systematic review of ﬁve articles [59], it was reported that both plyometric training
and heavy weight RE improved running economy by ~5%. In some studies, a short-term
(4-week) heavy weight training intervention improved running economy (+6.3%; 44.3 ± 4.9
to 47.3 ± 6.8 mlkg−1min−1), but plyometric training did not [60].
2.3. Combination ofDifferent RE Modialities
Skovgaard et al. [61] studied the effect of a combination of strength training and speed
endurance training on the athletic performance of runners. They concluded that this type
of training improves running economy without increasing the risk of overtraining, which is
consistent with other research ﬁndings [54,62]. Li et al. [11] found that 6 weeks of complex
training, which combines heavy weight training and plyometric exercises with endurance
training, improved maximum muscle strength and power, running economy, and velocity
at VO2max in well-trained endurance runners, which was not the case in resistance training,
which consisted of only strength endurance exercises. A study by Barnes et al. [63] exam-
ined the impact of heavy weight training and plyometric training on endurance runners

Sports 2022, 10, 98
5 of 16
during the competitive period. They found that, in accordance to previous research, the
body composition did not change, but there were some unexpected results—the effects
of the intervention on running economy varied signiﬁcantly between male and female
participants. In particular, the addition of plyometric or heavy weight training during
the competition period had a negative impact on the competitive performance in males,
while a positive effect was seen in female endurance runners [63]. Further research is
urgently needed to reveal possible differences in adaptations to RE between male and
female runners.
2.4. Isometric Training
It has been suggested that isometric training could elicit similar or even higher adapta-
tions in running economy than plyometric training. Two older studies reported an improve-
ment in running economy (~4–7%) after isometric plantar ﬂexor strength training [64,65].
Recently, Lum et al. [66] directly compared the effects of isometric and plyometric train-
ing in a 6-week interventional study. Although both training types improved running
economy, the isometric group surprisingly improved more, which was also reﬂected in
a higher maximal aerobic speed. It could be that isometric training is superior in terms
of increasing muscle/tendon stiffness, which was indicated in some of the previous stud-
ies [67]; however, leg quasi-stiffness during running in the study by Lum et al. [66] was not
changed in either group. While further research is clearly needed, the authors concluded
that isometric training could be a good alternative to plyometric training, especially during
training cycles when runners already experience a high volume of load during their regular
endurance training.
2.5. RE Coupled with Vibration Training
Another attractive avenue for research is the inclusion of vibration platforms into the
training regimen. Vibration exposure is thought to affect the central and peripheral nerves
and enhance neuromuscular activity, thereby increasing force production [68]. Among other
things, the improvement of running economy is thought to be due to altered neuromuscular
properties leading to increased muscle stiffness and the increased recruitment of motor
units [69]. However, according to available evidence, performing RE on a vibrating platform
has no particular contribution to improving running economy compared to RE alone [70].
2.6. Effects ofRE Program Interruption
Interruption of the RE training results in the reduction of strength endurance, maxi-
mum strength, and power [71]. Energy expenditure levels during running are maintained
even after a 2-week period without training [72]. A recent study investigated the effects
of an 8-week explosive RE program, followed by a 4-week interruption (only endurance
training was conditioned) of training, on running economy,
V˙O2max, maximum strength,
CMJ, and 3000 m running performance [71]. The 8-week program elicited signiﬁcant im-
provements in running economy (+5.7%), which were retained after the 4-week period
without RE training. Importantly, 3000 m run times were reduced after the ﬁrst period
(−2.4%), with a possible further reduction after 4 weeks without RE training (−4.4%).
While this research was conducted on a very small sample and should be interpreted with
caution, the results indicate that the incorporation of RE should be emphasized in the
pre-competition phase, with a possible detraining or cessation of RE before the competition.
Berryman et al. [71] also found that neuromuscular abilities were maintained after the
interruption period. A meta-analysis found that a short-term interruption of resistance
training reduces muscle strength, while the magnitude of the effect varies according to the
type of training, age, and duration of the interruption [73]. However, this meta-analysis
was not speciﬁc to RE in endurance runners. According to current ﬁndings, additional
research is clearly needed in this area [71].

Sports 2022, 10, 98
6 of 16
2.7. Acute Effects ofRE and Interference with Running Training
It should also be pointed out that the acute effect of RE (both strength training and
plyometric training) is associated with increased energy expenditure during running and
thus reduced running economy, which could pose a problem for runners. Namely, RE could
impact the quality of endurance training. Marcello et al. [74] examined the acute effects
of a combination of strength and plyometric training on running economy in endurance
runners. Elevated
V˙O2 and post-workout energy expenditure indicated that strength and
plyometric training reduced running economy at moderate running intensities; however,
this negative effect disappeared in less than 24 h, which was also observed in a previous
study [75]. Acutely, strength training leads to decreased muscle activation during running,
leading to the reduced ability to produce force [76]. Similarly, activation inhibition occurs
with plyometric training. Paschalis et al. [77] analyzed the effect of eccentric exercise on
indirect indicators of muscle damage (delayed onset of muscle soreness, range of motion,
and isometric force) and running economy. The training consisted of 12 × 10 repetitions
of maximal voluntary contractions by each leg. Post-exercise indirect muscle damage
markers were signiﬁcantly altered after 24 to 72 h (p < 0.05), without signiﬁcant changes in
running economy (p > 0.05). Later, the same research group reported that after 48 h, post-
exercise muscle damage indicators were signiﬁcantly changed, while running economy
(assessed at 70% VO2max) remained unchanged [78]. Burt et al. [79] measured the impact
of exercise-induced muscle damage after performing 100 squats (10 sets of 10 repetitions
at 80% of body mass) on the submaximal running performance of recreational athletes.
They recorded a signiﬁcant increase in
V˙O2, minute ventilation and blood lactate during
submaximal running, as well as decreased maximum torque in hip extensors and lower
vertical jump height 24–48 h post-training. Later, the same research group demonstrated
that the repeated bout effect (the protective effect of an exercise session during subsequent
bouts of muscle-damaging exercise [80]) also extends to running performance [81]. In
sum, practitioners must keep the acute effects of RE in mind when designing RE programs
for runners. The literature indicates that RE and the associated exercise-induced muscle
damage may acutely interfere with running economy and that this effect is likely smaller
after subsequent sessions of RE.
2.8. Additional Considerations
Strength, endurance, and energy expenditure during activity also affect triathlon
performance [55]. In triathlons, each discipline has a negative impact on the amount
of energy available for the next discipline [82]. One study [55] found increased cycling
economy after endurance training; however, running economy was only improved with an
addition of heavy weight RE. Concurrent resistance training and endurance training were
presumed to increase musculoskeletal stiffness and to promote a greater recruitment of
motor units, increasing the rate of force development and maximum strength [55], without
changes in body mass. Similar ﬁndings were provided by other studies; for instance,
Millet et al. [83] found that heavy weight training improved maximal strength and RE, but
did not affect
VO˙
2.
In the current literature, there is a clear lack of studies investigating speciﬁc run-
ning populations, such as trail runners and ultra-endurance runners. During later stages
of ultra-endurance events and during uphill running, the energy cost of running is in-
creased [84]. Future studies could investigate if RE can ameliorate this decrease. Recent
research indicates that muscle strength and power tests may be sensitive to the running-
related workload [85]. In addition to classic RE, uphill running training may also improve
running economy [86]. Although the method of running uphill is often used to improve
running speed and, consequently, running performance, there is a lack of research on this
topic, especially in terms of physiological adaptations [87]. One study compared the effects
of high-intensity uphill and ground-level running intervals on ˙VO2, blood lactate concen-
tration, and muscle strength, and while there was an improvement in some outcomes ( ˙VO2,
blood lactate concentration, and % ˙VO2max) after both training regimens, the changes

Sports 2022, 10, 98
7 of 16
were very small [87]. Further research is needed to assess the effects of uphill running on
running economy. As it currently stands, it seems that this method is inferior for improving
running economy in comparison to RE.
3. Resistance Exercise for Modifying Running Technique
Running technique is an important aspect for movement economy and injury preven-
tion. Several biomechanical factors were raised in the literature that may affect running
economy. These factors can be categorized as spatiotemporal (parameters relating to
changes in the phase of the gait cycle, such as ground contact time, stride length, etc.),
lower limb kinematics (lower limb joint angles), kinetics (ground reaction forces), and
neuromuscular factors (muscle activation and coactivation). Regarding the spatiotemporal
factors, the literature reports that self-selected stride length and frequency is optimal or
very near to being optimal for maximizing economy [88,89]. On the other hand, some of
the literature reports that optimal stride length could be 3% shorter than preferred stride
length for improving running economy [90,91]. Although there seems to be some merit in
attempts to optimize stride frequency, such approaches are questionable for runners who
have likely achieved optimal stride frequency through years of training. Stride length and
stride frequency may also affect how far ahead of the body the foot strikes the ground. In
running techniques with longer stride length and lower stride frequency, the foot strikes
the ground far ahead of the body, with the ﬁrst ground contact through the heels. Running
on the heels is related to a higher breaking peak force [92] and could present an injury
risk factor. On the other hand, a higher stride frequency decreases the length between the
initial foot strike and center of mass (CoM), thus reducing peak braking and propulsive
force [93]. Moreover, studies reported that a rear foot strike imposed higher biomechanical
loads on overall ground impact and knee and patellofemoral joints, whereas a forefoot
strike imposed higher biomechanical loads on the ankle joint and Achilles tendon [94].
When designing RE programs, running technique should be taken into account in order to
implement exercises that target speciﬁc muscles and tissues to prepare them for running
loads. Similar to stride frequency and stride length, vertical oscillation can be altered.
Acute intervention studies have shown that increasing vertical oscillation leads to an in-
crease in
V˙O2 [95,96]. It is important to mention that rearfoot striking is more prevalent
with increased distance within a running session/race and occurs more commonly in less
experienced runners [97,98].
Furthermore, one of the reasons for the occurrence of overuse injuries is suboptimal
running technique, resulting in poor lower limb kinematics [29,33], which results in the
uneven distribution of forces between body segments. It is suggested that one of the
contributing factors to the development of running-related injuries may be the suboptimal
lower limb kinematics, especially the inability to control the motion of the lower extremity
segments in the frontal and transverse planes. Examples from the literature include ex-
cessive hip adduction and internal rotation, knee abduction, tibial internal rotation, and
foot pronation [99]. Moreover, a poor dynamic alignment pattern of hip adduction and
internal rotation, knee abduction, tibial internal rotation, and foot pronation during running
may lead to injury [99,100]. Biomechanical studies report that hip abductors and external
rotators play an important role in controlling the position of the entire lower extremity in
the frontal and transverse planes in the single-leg stance, suggesting that strengthening
those muscles may beneﬁt running technique and reduce injury risk. This was supported
by Bellchamber and Van Den Bogert [101], reporting that the energy ﬂow during walking is
oriented from proximal to distal, suggesting that the kinematics of proximal joints affect the
kinematics of distal joints, thus highlighting the importance of pelvis and hip musculature
for running and walking. Therefore, it is possible that increased hip strength may affect the
lower extremity biomechanics in the frontal and transverse planes and therefore improve
the dynamic alignment of lower extremity joints, thus improving running technique. How-
ever, the literature on the effects of RE on running biomechanics is relatively scarce. The
synthesis of the relevant studies is provided below.

Sports 2022, 10, 98
8 of 16
Feltner et al. reported that an 8-week intervention consisting of exercise that directly
strengthened the ankle and foot musculature (isokinetic eversion and inversion training)
signiﬁcantly reduced the inversion/eversion angle at heel strike and eversion range of
motion [102]. However, this was not true for the functional training consisting of exercises
such as step-ups, balance board exercises, and one- and two-leg jumps. Furthermore,
Snyder et al. reported that a 6-week hip-strengthening program reduced foot eversion
range of motion, hip internal range of motion, ankle inversion moment, and knee abduction
moment, while there were no changes in pelvic range of motion in the frontal plane [103].
Together, these ﬁndings demonstrate that strength training oriented towards strengthening
the hip and ankle/foot musculature reduces eversion range of motion, while strengthening
the hip musculature also reduces hip internal range of motion and knee abduction when
running. This indicates that strength training may inﬂuence the lower extremity joint
loading, thus improving running technique.
Mofﬁt et al. [104] found that maximal strength in squatting is associated with lower
internal rotation of the knee during running. Contrary to those results, Willy and Davis
reported that strength training intervention that improved hip abduction strength, hip exter-
nal rotation strength, and single-leg squat mechanics did not alter running technique [105].
Similar results were also reported by Snyder et al. [103], indicating that running technique
is difﬁcult to change by strength training alone. On the other hand, the literature reports
that running technique could be improved with neuromuscular training with feedback
regarding critical technique deﬁcits, such as, for example, hip adduction, hip internal rota-
tion, and contralateral pelvis drop [106]. Moreover, feedback interventions are promising
for reducing ground reaction forces during running [107,108].
In conclusion, RE for lower extremities may be beneﬁcial for improving joint kinemat-
ics during running, but the impact on overall running technique is questionable, and more
research is needed. Nevertheless, the literature does not report negative effects of RE on
running biomechanics, suggesting that for improving running technique, neuromuscular
training with feedback regarding technique deﬁcits could be a favorable option.
4. Resistance Exercise for Reducing the Risk of Running-Related Injuries
Running-related injuries remain a major problem for runners [109], and the best
approach to prevention is still largely equivocal [37,39]. The most prevalent running-related
injuries are medial tibial stress syndrome, Achilles tendinopathy, plantar fasciitis, patellar
tendinopathy, iliotibial band syndrome, stress fractures of the tibia, and patellofemoral pain
syndrome [28,110]. Very recently, a study conducted on more than 4000 runners reported
virtually no beneﬁt of a comprehensive prevention program on injury risk [111]. The
implemented program included various pieces of advice pertaining to load progression
and management, footwear, subjective aspects, and running-speciﬁc exercises. However,
RE was not included. Some of the running injuries (e.g., ITBS and PFPS) are characterized
by altered running mechanics and weakness of certain muscle groups. The purpose of
this section is to summarize the available evidence of the effectiveness of RE for reducing
the risk of running-related injuries. According to Vincent et al. [112], more than 70% of
running injuries are of the overuse nature, but inadequate running techniques and poor
neuromuscular control are also key mechanisms for the occurrence of injuries. In trail
runners, running experience, neglecting warm-ups, having no specialized running plan,
training on asphalt, and double training sessions per day contribute signiﬁcantly to injury
risk [113].
4.1. Studies Investigating Running-Related Injuries in General
In a recent study [114], track and ﬁeld runners reduced the incidence of injuries,
especially medial tibial stress syndrome (p = 0.012), after 6 weeks of neuromuscular train-
ing, which included jumping, landing, strength, endurance, agility, and trunk training
(p = 0.044), and they also improved their physical ﬁtness. However, this was a very small
study (n = 22), and the generalization of the effectiveness of such an exercise program

Sports 2022, 10, 98
9 of 16
is limited. A study of 1538 soldiers found that a 12-week stretching program during
warm-up work did not reduce the risk of injury to soldiers; however, they found that the
soldiers’ physical ﬁtness itself was a statistically signiﬁcant predictor of risk of lower limb
injury [115]. In another cohort of soldiers, performing RE at least three times a week was
associated with a 54% lower risk of running-related injuries compared to performing no
or less than one unit of RE per week (p < 0.001) [116]. A 12-month combined prevention
training exercise with a concomitant increase in physical exertion in 1020 soldiers did not
result in a statistically signiﬁcant reduction in the incidence of injuries (p = 0.162) [117]. A
12-week self-administered muscle strengthening program (included muscles: quadriceps,
abductors, and trunk muscles), did not reduce the incidence of marathon injuries and the
associated early end of the race (p = 0.90) [118].
Strengthening the ankle and foot muscles reduced the incidence of running-related
injuries [119]. This one-year intervention differed from other interventions, as it focused
primarily on the ankle–foot complex. The intervention strengthened the muscles of the
ankle and foot, which improved cushioning upon contact with the ground, reduced the
cumulative load, improved the movement in the ankle, and thus reduced the occurrence of
running injuries. The intervention improved tolerance for the load, as the author found a
correlation between foot strength and the time to injury. Lastly, the incidence of running
injuries was 2.42 times higher in the control group, which did not undergo the intervention.
These ﬁndings support the previously proposed protocol to strengthen the foot muscles
to increase the ability to cushion forces upon contact with the ground [120]. The foot
placement index was found to correlate with the longer period to injury occurrence. An
8-week foot and ankle muscle strengthening program increased the cross-section of the
abductor hallucis and ﬂexor digitorum brevis muscles in 31 healthy runners, but there were
no changes in running biomechanics and toe muscle strength [121].
Peterson et al. [122] found in a meta-analysis that running injuries may be associated
with reduced knee extensor strength (p = 0.03) and lower hip adduction velocity during
running (p = 0.04). Running injuries may also be associated with an imbalance between
stronger hip abductors and weaker hip adductors [123]. A study conducted on high school
cross-country runners found an association between the decreased strength of hip abductors
(p = 0.046), knee ﬂexors (p = 0.046), and knee extensors (p = 0.038), and a higher incidence of
anterior knee pain [124]. Another study found an association between running injury rate
and asymmetry of hip abductor strength in male student runners, while in female runners,
the injuries were associated with decreased unilateral hip abductor strength and bilaterally
decreased hip external rotator strength [125].
4.2. Studies Assessing Speciﬁc Running-Related Injuries
According to Mucha et al. [126], decreased hip ﬂexor strength in endurance runners
is associated with the risk of ITBS. A study of 24 endurance runners with ITBS found
that the strength of the hip abductors of the injured leg was lower than the strength
of the hip abductors of the intact leg as well as the strength of the hip abductors of
runners in the control group. In the second part of the study, a 6-week rehabilitation was
performed, mainly aimed at strengthening the gluteus medius muscle, which increased the
hip abduction strength in runners (women: +34.9% and men: +51.4%), as well as eliminated
pain, thereby allowing runners to return to running without a recurrence of symptoms [127].
A recent pilot study [128] found that an 8-week strength program in people with ITBS,
including hip-strengthening exercises with the gradual addition of complexity, reduced
pain, increased muscle strength, and improved movement function compared to stretching
and isolated hip exercises. The correct running technique is also of key importance in ITBS,
as the kinetics and kinematics of the hip, knee, and ankle differ between runners with and
without ITBS [129].
An important factor in the development of PFPS is the weakness of the hip joint mus-
cles, especially the hip abductors [130]. With an intervention that included a 3-week hip
muscle strengthening program, hip abductor strength improved by 32.69%, which is com-

Sports 2022, 10, 98
10 of 16
parable to another previous study [131]. Nevertheless, the study did not show a difference
in running mechanics between the groups, so according to the researcher’s ﬁndings, the
weakness of the hip abductors is not associated with altered running mechanics. A 14-week
hip strengthening program on two subjects with increased hip adduction, internal hip
rotation, and knee valgus, as well as decreased strength of the hip abductors, hip extensors,
and external rotators of the hip, decreased knee pain and improved the mechanics of the
lower limb when stepping down [131].
Although more typical for team sports and related to sprinting [132,133], hamstring
injuries also occur in distance runners [28]. The risk of hamstring injury can be reduced
by ﬂexibility training as well as strength training, as Wan et al. [134] found that mobility
training statistically signiﬁcantly lengthened the semimembranosus and long head of the
biceps femoris (p ≤ 0.026) and reduced the maximum load on the hamstrings, while strength
training increased the length and reduced maximum load on all hamstring muscles. In their
literature review, Raya-Gonzalez et al. [135] found that, among many other approaches,
the reduction of hamstring muscle injuries is thought to be largely inﬂuenced by eccentric
and balance training. In two case reports performed on two different runners with an
inﬂamed hamstring tendon, the eccentric exercise protocol for the posterior thigh muscle,
stabilization exercise for the lumbo-pelvic area, and dry needling trigger points reduced
pain and tenderness as well as restored full lower limb function and running without the
onset of symptoms [136].
Groin pain is a very common problem in professional athletes [137]. Due to the
presence of speciﬁc anatomical structures in the groin area, the diagnosis of pain is often
difﬁcult, and the terminology appears to be inconsistent [138]. In the literature, sports
hernias and chronic groin pain can also be found as synonyms for groin pain [137,138].
The presence of other pathologies is usually also reported in athletes with chronic groin
pain [137]. Although groin pain is more common in athletes who perform repetitive hip
movements (e. g. kicking the ball) and rapidly change the direction of running (team sports
such as football and basketball), groin pain sometimes occurs in runners, as well [138].
Moran and Rogowski [138] performed exercises for hip stability and strengthening the
pelvic and lumbar region on a female runner diagnosed with groin pain and labral lacera-
tions. The intervention improved running cadence and stride, knee control, as a smaller
knee valgus was observed, and decreased pelvic drop, enabling the runner to successfully
return to competitions. After reviewing the literature, we found that very little literature
has examined groin pain in runners and its association to running biomechanics [138].
Future research to examine the effects of RE interventions to reduce the risk of groin pain
or prevent its reoccurrence is needed.
In female endurance runners, stress fractures are highly prevalent and may be asso-
ciated with menstrual disorders. Hutson et al. [139] found that amenorrheic runners had
a 2.25 higher incidence rate of stress fractures compared to eumenorrheic runners. In the
same study, plyometric training did not seem to reduce the injury rate [139].
In summary, some studies indicate a potentially beneﬁcial effect of RE on running-
related injury risk. However, several studies have used small sample sizes and many have
been performed on military personnel; thus, the generalization of the results is questionable.
Previous literature reviews on the topic also reported inconclusive results [39,140] and
stressed that more research is needed.
5. Conclusions
The aim of this narrative review is to summarize the available evidence on the ef-
fectiveness of RE for improving running economy, modifying running technique, and
reducing the risk of running-related injuries. The evidence consistently shows that lower
limb RE is effective for improving running economy. A combination of strength training
and plyometric drills is recommended to improve RE. Isometric training is also emerging
as a possible alternative and is recommend especially when the overall training load is
already high. Lower limb RE may be beneﬁcial for improving joint kinematics during run-

Sports 2022, 10, 98
11 of 16
ning; however, biofeedback training is probably more effective for altering overall running
biomechanics. RE may help reduce running-related injury risk, although the evidence is
scarce. In this regard, we recommend that all major lower limb muscle groups be targeted
if no speciﬁc deﬁcits are present.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.Š., P.Š., J.P. and Ž.K.; methodology, A.Š., P.Š., J.P. and
Ž.K.; investigation, A.Š., P.Š. and J.P.; data curation, A.Š., P.Š., J.P. and Ž.K.; writing—original draft
preparation, A.Š., P.Š. and J.P.; writing—review and editing, Ž.K.; visualization, A.Š., P.Š., J.P. and
Ž.K.; supervision, Ž.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Nevill, A.M.; Brown, D.; Godfrey, R.; Johnson, P.J.; Romer, L.; Stewart, A.D.; Winter, E.M. Modeling Maximum Oxygen Uptake of
Elite Endurance Athletes. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2003, 35, 488–494. [CrossRef]
2.
3.
Schneider, D.A.; Lacroix, K.A.; Atkinson, G.R.; Troped, P.J.; Pollack, J. Ventilatory Threshold and Maximal Oxygen Uptake during
Cycling and Running in Triathletes. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1990, 22, 257–264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Beattie, K.; Kenny, I.C.; Lyons, M.; Carson, B.P. The Effect of Strength Training on Performance in Endurance Athletes. Sports Med.
2014, 44, 845–865. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Anderson, T. Biomechanics and Running Economy. Sports Med. 1996, 22, 76–89. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Thomas, D.Q.; Fernhall, B.; Granat, H. Changes in Running Economy during a 5-Km Run in Trained Men and Women Runners. J.
Strength Cond. Res. 1999, 13, 162–167. [CrossRef]
6.
Di Prampero, P.E.; Capelli, C.; Pagliaro, P.; Antonutto, G.; Girardis, M.; Zamparo, P.; Soule, R.G. Energetics of Best Performances
in Middle-Distance Running. J. Appl. Physiol. 1993, 74, 2318–2324. [CrossRef]
7. Moore, I.S. Is There an Economical Running Technique? A Review of Modiﬁable Biomechanical Factors Affecting Running
Economy. Sports Med. 2016, 46, 793–807. [CrossRef]
8.
Paavolainen, L.M.; Nummela, A.T.; Rusko, H.K. Neuromuscular Characteristics and Muscle Power as Determinants of 5-Km
Running Performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1999, 31, 124–130. [CrossRef]
9. Nummela, A.T.; Paavolainen, L.M.; Sharwood, K.A.; Lambert, M.I.; Noakes, T.D.; Rusko, H.K. Neuromuscular Factors De-
termining 5 Km Running Performance and Running Economy in Well-Trained Athletes. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006, 97, 1.
[CrossRef]
10. Saunders, P.U.; Pyne, D.B.; Telford, R.D.; Hawley, J.A. Factors Affecting Running Economy in Trained Distance Runners. Sports
Med. 2004, 34, 465–485. [CrossRef]
11. Li, F.; Wang, R.; Newton, R.U.; Sutton, D.; Shi, Y.; Ding, H. Effects of Complex Training versus Heavy Resistance Training on
Neuromuscular Adaptation, Running Economy and 5-Km Performance in Well-Trained Distance Runners. PeerJ 2019, 7, e6787.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Sasaki, K.; Neptune, R.R. Muscle Mechanical Work and Elastic Energy Utilization during Walking and Running near the Preferred
Gait Transition Speed. Gait Posture 2006, 23, 383–390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Vogt, M.; Hoppeler, H.H. Eccentric Exercise: Mechanisms and Effects When Used as Training Regime or Training Adjunct. J. Appl.
Physiol. 2014, 116, 1446–1454. [CrossRef]
14. Beattie, K.; Carson, B.P.; Lyons, M.; Kenny, I.C. The Relationship between Maximal Strength and Reactive Strength. Int. J. Sports
Physiol. Perform. 2017, 12, 548–553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Butler, R.J.; Crowell, H.P.; Davis, I.M.C. Lower Extremity Stiffness: Implications for Performance and Injury. Clin. Biomech. 2003,
18, 511–517. [CrossRef]
16. Dumke, C.L.; Pfaffenroth, C.M.; McBride, J.M.; McCauley, G.O. Relationship between Muscle Strength, Power and Stiffness and
Running Economy in Trained Male Runners. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform. 2010, 5, 249–261. [CrossRef]
17. Latash, M.L.; Zatsiorsky, V.M. Joint Stiffness: Myth or Reality? Hum. Mov. Sci. 1993, 12, 653–692. [CrossRef]
18. Jaén-Carrillo, D.; Roche-Seruendo, L.E.; Felton, L.; Cartón-Llorente, A.; García-Pinillos, F. Stiffness in Running: A Narrative
Integrative Review. Strength Cond. J. 2021, 43, 104–115. [CrossRef]
19. Struzik, A.; Karamanidis, K.; Lorimer, A.; Keogh, J.W.L.; Gajewski, J. Application of Leg, Vertical, and Joint Stiffness in Running
Performance: A Literature Overview. Appl. Bionics Biomech. 2021, 2021, 9914278. [CrossRef]
20. Akagi, R.; Shikiba, T.; Tanaka, J.; Takahashi, H. A Six-Week Resistance Training Program Does Not Change Shear Modulus of the
Triceps Brachii. J. Appl. Biomech. 2016, 32, 373–378. [CrossRef]

Sports 2022, 10, 98
12 of 16
21. Cornu, C.; Silveira, M.I.A.; Goubel, F. Inﬂuence of Plyometric Training on the Mechanical Impedance of the Human Ankle Joint.
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 1997, 76, 282–288. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Dalleau, G.; Belli, A.; Bourdin, M.; Lacour, J.R. The Spring-Mass Model and the Energy Cost of Treadmill Running. Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 1998, 77, 257–263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Craib, M.W.; Mitchell, V.A.; Fields, K.B.; Cooper, T.R.; Hopewell, R.; Morgan, D.W. The Association between Flexibility and
Running Economy in Sub-Elite Male Distance Runners. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1996, 28, 737–743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Trehearn, T.L.; Buresh, R.J. Sit-and-Reach Flexibility and Running Economy of Men and Women Collegiate Distance Runners. J.
Strength Cond. Res. 2009, 23, 158–162. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Carter, J.; Greenwood, M. Does Flexibility Exercise Affect Running Economy? A Brief Review. Strength Cond. J. 2015, 37, 12–21.
[CrossRef]
26. Van Gent, R.N.; Siem, D.; Van Middeloop, M.; Van Os, A.G.; Bierma-Zeinstra, S.M.A.; Koes, B.W. Incidence and Determinants of
Lower Extremity Running Injuries in Long Distance Runners: A Systematic Review. Sport Geneeskd. 2007, 40, 16–29. [CrossRef]
27. Bertelsen, M.L.; Hulme, A.; Petersen, J.; Brund, R.K.; Sørensen, H.; Finch, C.F.; Parner, E.T.; Nielsen, R.O. A Framework for the
Etiology of Running-Related Injuries. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 2017, 27, 1170–1180. [CrossRef]
28. Lopes, A.D.; Hespanhol, L.C.; Yeung, S.S.; Costa, L.O.P. What Are the Main Running-Related Musculoskeletal Injuries? A
Systematic Review. Sports Med. 2012, 42, 891–905. [CrossRef]
29. Troy, K.L.; Davis, I.S.; Tenforde, A.S. A Narrative Review of Metatarsal Bone Stress Injury in Athletic Populations: Etiology,
Biomechanics, and Management. PM R 2021, 13, 1281–1290. [CrossRef]
30. Neal, B.S.; Barton, C.J.; Gallie, R.; O’Halloran, P.; Morrissey, D. Runners with Patellofemoral Pain Have Altered Biomechanics
Which Targeted Interventions Can Modify: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Gait Posture 2016, 45, 69–82. [CrossRef]
31. Aderem, J.; Louw, Q.A. Biomechanical Risk Factors Associated with Iliotibial Band Syndrome in Runners: A Systematic Review.
BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 2015, 16, 356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Boling, M.; Padua, D.; Creighton, R. Concentric and Eccentric Torque of the Hip Musculature in Individuals with and without
Patellofemoral Pain. J. Athl. Train. 2009, 44, 7–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Ferber, R.; Noehren, B.; Hamill, J.; Davis, I. Competitive Female Runners with a History of Iliotibial Band Syndrome Demonstrate
Atypical Hip and Knee Kinematics. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 2010, 40, 52–58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Barnes, K.R.; Kilding, A.E. Strategies to Improve Running Economy. Sports Med. 2015, 45, 37–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Balsalobre-Fernández, C.; Santos-Concejero, J.; Grivas, G.V. Effects of Strength Training on Running Economy in Highly Trained
Runners: A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis of Controlled Trials. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2016, 30, 2361–2368. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
36. Denadai, B.S.; de Aguiar, R.A.; de Lima, L.C.R.; Greco, C.C.; Caputo, F. Explosive Training and Heavy Weight Training Are
Effective for Improving Running Economy in Endurance Athletes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med. 2017,
47, 545–554. [CrossRef]
37. Napier, C.; Willy, R.W. The Prevention and Treatment of Running Injuries: A State of the Art. Int. J. Sports Phys. Ther. 2021,
16, 968–970. [CrossRef]
38. Napier, C.; Cochrane, C.K.; Taunton, J.E.; Hunt, M.A. Gait Modiﬁcations to Change Lower Extremity Gait Biomechanics in
Runners: A Systematic Review. Br. J. Sports Med. 2015, 49, 1382–1388. [CrossRef]
39. Yeung, S.S.; Yeung, E.W.; Gillespie, L.D. Interventions for Preventing Lower Limb Soft-Tissue Running Injuries. Cochrane Database
Syst. Rev. 2011, 6, CD001256. [CrossRef]
40. Baxter, C.; Mc Naughton, L.R.; Sparks, A.; Norton, L.; Bentley, D. Impact of Stretching on the Performance and Injury Risk of
Long-Distance Runners. Res. Sports Med. 2017, 25, 78–90. [CrossRef]
41. Alcaraz-Ibañez, M.; Rodríguez-Pérez, M. Effects of Resistance Training on Performance in Previously Trained Endurance Runners:
A Systematic Review. J. Sports Sci. 2018, 36, 613–629. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Joyner, M.J. Modeling: Optimal Marathon Performance on the Basis of Physiological Factors. J. Appl. Physiol. 1991, 70, 683–687.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Paavolainen, L.; Hakkinen, K.; Hamalainen, I.; Nummela, A.; Rusko, H. Explosive-Strength Training Improves 5-Km Running
Time by Improving Running Economy and Muscle Power. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 2003, 13, 272. [CrossRef]
44. di Prampero, P.E.; Atchou, G.; Brückner, J.-C.; Moia, C. The Energetics of Endurance Running. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol.
1986, 55, 259–266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Mikkola, J.; Rusko, H.; Nummela, A.; Pollari, T.; Häkkinen, K. Concurrent Endurance and Explosive Type Strength Training
Improves Neuromuscular and Anaerobic Characteristics in Young Distance Runners. Int. J. Sports Med. 2007, 28, 602–611.
[CrossRef]
46. Jung, A.P. The Impact of Resistance Training on Distance Running Performance. Sports Med. 2003, 33, 539–552. [CrossRef]
47. Li, F.; Newton, R.U.; Shi, Y.; Sutton, D.; Ding, H. Correlation of Eccentric Strength, Reactive Strength, and Leg Stiffness with
Running Economy in Well-Trained Distance Runners. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2021, 35, 1491–1499. [CrossRef]
48. Lindstedt, S.L.; LaStayo, P.C.; Reich, T.E. When Active Muscles Lengthen. News Physiol. Sci. 2001, 16, 256–261.
49. Komi, P.V. Stretch-Shortening Cycle: A Powerful Model to Study Normal and Fatigued Muscle. J. Biomech. 2000, 33, 1197–1206.
[CrossRef]

Sports 2022, 10, 98
13 of 16
50. Docherty, D.; Sporer, B. A Proposed Model for Examining the Interference Phenomenon between Concurrent Aerobic and
Strength Training. Sports Med. 2000, 30, 385–394. [CrossRef]
51. Beattie, K.; Carson, B.P.; Lyons, M.; Rossiter, A.; Kenny, I.C. The Effect of Strength Training on Performance Indicators in Distance
Runners. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2017, 31, 9–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Cormie, P.; McGuigan, M.R.; Newton, R.U. Developing Maximal Neuromuscular Power: Part 1—Biological Basis of Maximal
Power Production. Sports Med. 2011, 41, 17–38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Johnston, R.E.; Quinn, T.J.; Kertzer, R.; Vroman, N.B. Strength Training in Female Distance Runners: Impact on Running Economy.
J. Strength Cond. Res. 1997, 11, 224–229. [CrossRef]
54. Støren, Ø.; Helgerud, J.; Støa, E.M.; Hoff, J. Maximal Strength Training Improves Running Economy in Distance Runners. Med.
Sci. Sports Exerc. 2008, 40, 1087–1092. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Luckin-Baldwin, K.M.; Badenhorst, C.E.; Cripps, A.J.; Landers, G.J.; Merrells, R.J.; Bulsara, M.K.; Hoyne, G.F. Strength Training
Improves Exercise Economy in Triathletes during a Simulated Triathlon. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform. 2021, 16, 663–673.
[CrossRef]
56. Saunders, P.U.; Telford, R.D.; Pyne, D.B.; Peltola, E.M.; Cunningham, R.B.; Gore, C.J.; Hawley, J.A. Short-Term Plyometric Training
Improves Running Economy in Highly Trained Middle and Long Distance Runners. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2006, 20, 947–954.
[CrossRef]
57. Spurrs, R.W.; Murphy, A.J.; Watsford, M.L. The Effect of Plyometric Training on Distance Running Performance. Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol. 2003, 89, 1–7. [CrossRef]
58. Turner, A.; Owings, M.; Schwane, J. Improvement in Running Economy After 6 Weeks of Plyometric Training. J. Strength Cond.
Res. 2003, 17, 60–67. [CrossRef]
59. Yamamoto, L.M.; Lopez, R.M.; Klau, J.F.; Casa, D.J.; Kraemer, W.J.; Maresh, C.M. The Effects of Resistance Training on Endurance
Distance Running Performance among Highly Trained Runners: A Systematic Review. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2008, 22, 2036–2044.
[CrossRef]
60. Guglielmo, L.G.A.; Greco, C.C.; Denadai, B.S. Effects of Strength Training on Running Economy. Int. J. Sports Med. 2009, 30, 27–32.
[CrossRef]
61. Skovgaard, C.; Christensen, P.M.; Larsen, S.; Andersen, T.R.; Thomassen, M.; Bangsbo, J. Concurrent Speed Endurance and
Resistance Training Improves Performance, Running Economy, and Muscle NHE1 in Moderately Trained Runners. J. Appl.
Physiol. 2014, 117, 1097–1109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Bangsbo, J.; Gunnarsson, T.P.; Wendell, J.; Nybo, L.; Thomassen, M. Reduced Volume and Increased Training Intensity Elevate
Muscle Na+-K+ Pump A2-Subunit Expression as Well as Short- and Long-Term Work Capacity in Humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009,
107, 1771–1780. [CrossRef]
63. Barnes, K.R.; Hopkins, W.G.; Mcguigan, M.R.; Northuis, M.E.; Kilding, A.E. Effects of Resistance Training on Running Economy
and Cross-Country Performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2013, 45, 2322–2331. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Albracht, K.; Arampatzis, A. Exercise-Induced Changes in Triceps Surae Tendon Stiffness and Muscle Strength Affect Running
Economy in Humans. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2013, 113, 1605–1615. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Fletcher, J.R.; Esau, S.P.; MacIntosh, B.R. The Effect of Isometric Training on Muscle-Tendon Unit Stiffness of Medial Gastrocnemius
and the Economy of Locomotion in Highly-Trained Distance Runners. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2008, 40, S392. [CrossRef]
66. Lum, D.; Barbosa, T.M.; Aziz, A.R.; Balasekaran, G. Effects of Isometric Strength and Plyometric Training on Running Performance:
A Randomized Controlled Study. Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 2022, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Kubo, K.; Ishigaki, T.; Ikebukuro, T. Effects of Plyometric and Isometric Training on Muscle and Tendon Stiffness In Vivo. Physiol.
Rep. 2017, 5, e13374. [CrossRef]
68. Abercromby, A.; Amonette, W.; Layne, C.; McFarlin, B.; Hinman, M.; Paloski, W. Vibration Exposure and Biodynamic Responses
during Whole-Body Vibration Training. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2007, 39, 1794–1800. [CrossRef]
69. Luo, J.; McNamara, B.; Moran, K. The Use of Vibration Training to Enhance Muscle Strength and Power. Sports Med. 2005,
35, 23–41. [CrossRef]
70. Roschel, H.; Barroso, R.; Tricoli, V.; Batista, M.A.B.; Acquesta, F.M.; Serraõ, J.C.; Ugrinowitsch, C. Effects of Strength Training
Associated with Whole-Body Vibration Training on Running Economy and Vertical Stiffness. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2015,
29, 2215–2220. [CrossRef]
71. Berryman, N.; Mujika, I.; Bosquet, L. Effects of Short-Term Concurrent Training Cessation on the Energy Cost of Running and
Neuromuscular Performances in Middle-Distance Runners. Sports 2021, 9, 1. [CrossRef]
72. Houmard, J.A.; Hortobagyi, T.; Johns, R.A.; Bruno, N.J.; Nute, C.C.; Shinebarger, M.H.; Welborn, J. Effect of Short-Term Training
Cessation on Performance Measures in Distance Runners. Int. J. Sports Med. 1992, 13, 572–576. [CrossRef]
73. Bosquet, L.; Berryman, N.; Dupuy, O.; Mekary, S.; Arvisais, D.; Bherer, L.; Mujika, I. Effect of Training Cessation on Muscular
Performance: A Meta-Analysis. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 2013, 23, e140–e149. [CrossRef]
74. Marcello, R.T.; Greer, B.K.; Greer, A.E. Acute Effects of Plyometric and Resistance Training on Running Economy in Trained
Runners. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2017, 31, 2432–2437. [CrossRef]
75. Palmer, C.D.; Sleivert, G.G. Running Economy Is Impaired Following a Single Bout of Resistance Exercise. J. Sci. Med. Sports 2001,
4, 447–459. [CrossRef]

Sports 2022, 10, 98
14 of 16
76. Warren, G.L.; Lowe, D.A.; Armstrong, R.B. Measurement Tools Used in the Study of Eccentric Contraction-Induced Injury. Sports
Med. 1999, 27, 43–59. [CrossRef]
77. Paschalis, V.; Koutedakis, Y.; Baltzopoulos, V.; Mougios, V.; Jamurtas, A.Z.; Theoharis, V. The Effects of Muscle Damage on
Running Economy in Healthy Males. Int. J. Sports Med. 2005, 26, 827–831. [CrossRef]
78. Paschalis, V.; Baltzopoulos, V.; Mougios, V.; Jamurtas, A.Z.; Theoharis, V.; Karatzaferi, C.; Koutedakis, Y. Isokinetic Eccentric
Exercise of Quadriceps Femoris Does Not Affect Running Economy. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2008, 22, 1222–1227. [CrossRef]
79. Burt, D.; Lamb, K.; Nicholas, C.; Twist, C. Effects of Muscle-Damaging Exercise on Physiological, Metabolic, and Perceptual
Responses during Two Modes of Endurance Exercise. J. Exerc. Sci. Fit. 2012, 10, 70–77. [CrossRef]
80. Jeon, S.; Kang, M.; Ye, X. Contralateral Protective Effect against Repeated Bout of Damaging Exercise: A Meta-Analysis. Res.
Sports Med. 2021. [CrossRef]
81. Burt, D.; Lamb, K.; Nicholas, C.; Twist, C. Lower-Volume Muscle-Damaging Exercise Protects against High-Volume Muscle-
Damaging Exercise and the Detrimental Effects on Endurance Performance. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2015, 115, 1523–1532. [CrossRef]
82. Peeling, P.; Landers, G. Swimming Intensity during Triathlon: A Review of Current Research and Strategies to Enhance Race
Performance. J. Sports Sci. 2009, 27, 1079–1085. [CrossRef]
83. Millet, G.P.; Jaouen, B.; Borrani, F.; Candau, R. Effects of Concurrent Endurance and Strength Training on Running Economy and
VO2˙
Kinetics. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2002, 34, 1351–1359. [CrossRef]
84. Scheer, V.; Vieluf, S.; Cramer, L.; Jakobsmeyer, R.; Heitkamp, H.C. Changes in Running Economy During a 65-Km Ultramarathon.
Front. Physiol. 2018, 9, 1809. [CrossRef]
85. Matos, S.; Clemente, F.M.; Silva, R.; Pereira, J.; Bezerra, P.; Carral, J.M.C. Variations of Trail Runner’s Fitness Measures across a
Season and Relationships with Workload. Healthcare 2021, 9, 318. [CrossRef]
86. Midgley, A.W.; McNaughton, L.R.; Jones, A.M. Training to Enhance the Physiological Determinants of Long-Distance Running
Performance: Can Valid Recommendations Be given to Runners and Coaches Based on Current Scientiﬁc Knowledge? Sports
Med. 2007, 37, 857–880. [CrossRef]
87. Ferley, D.D.; Osborn, R.W.; Vukovich, M.D. The Effects of Incline and Level-Grade High-Intensity Interval Treadmill Training on
Running Economy and Muscle Power in Well-Trained Distance Runners. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2014, 28, 1298–1309. [CrossRef]
88. Moore, I.; Jones, A.; Dixon, S. Mechanisms for Improved Running Economy in Beginner Runners. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2012,
44, 1756–1763. [CrossRef]
89. Williams, K.R.; Cavanagh, P.R. Relationship between Distance Running Mechanics, Running Economy, and Performance. J. Appl.
Physiol. 1985, 63, 1236–1245. [CrossRef]
90. De Ruiter, C.J.; Verdijk, P.W.L.; Werker, W.; Zuidema, M.J.; de Haan, A. Stride Frequency in Relation to Oxygen Consumption in
Experienced and Novice Runners. Eur. J. Sports Sci. 2014, 14, 251–258. [CrossRef]
91. Connick, M.J.; Li, F.X. Changes in Timing of Muscle Contractions and Running Economy with Altered Stride Pattern during
Running. Gait Posture 2014, 39, 634–637. [CrossRef]
92. Arendse, R. A Biomechanical Basis for the Prescription of Orthoses in the Treatment of Common Running Injuries. Med. Hypotheses
2004, 62, 119–120. [CrossRef]
93. Lieberman, D.E.; Warrener, A.G.; Wang, J.; Castillo, E.R. Effects of Stride Frequency and Foot Position at Landing on Braking
Force, Hip Torque, Impact Peak Force and the Metabolic Cost of Running in Humans. J. Exp. Biol. 2015, 218, 3406–3414. [CrossRef]
94. Xu, Y.; Yuan, P.; Wang, R.; Wang, D.; Liu, J.; Zhou, H. Effects of Foot Strike Techniques on Running Biomechanics: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Health 2021, 13, 71–77. [CrossRef]
95. Craighead, D.; Lehecka, N.; King Deborah, L. A Novel Running Mechanic’s Class Changes Kinematics but Not Running Economy.
J. Strength Cond. Res. 2014, 28, 3142–3150. [CrossRef]
96. Tseh, W.; Caputo, J.L.; Morgan, D.W. Inﬂuence of Gait Manipulation on Running Economy in Female Distance Runners. J. Sport.
Sci. Med. 2008, 7, 91–95.
97. Larson, P.; Higgins, E.; Kaminski, J.; Decker, T.; Preble, J.; Lyons, D.; McIntyre, K.; Normile, A. Foot Strike Patterns of Recreational
and Sub-Elite Runners in a Long-Distance Road Race. J. Sports Sci. 2011, 29, 1665–1673. [CrossRef]
98. Bertelsen, M.; Jensen, J.; Nielsen, M.; Nielsen, R.O.; Rasmussen, S. Footstrike Patterns among Novice Runners Wearing a
Conventional, Neutral Running Shoe. Gait Posture 2013, 38, 354–356. [CrossRef]
99. Powers, C.M. The Inﬂuence of Altered Lower-Extremity Kinematics on Patellofemoral Joint Dysfunction: A Theoretical Perspec-
tive. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 2003, 33, 639–646. [CrossRef]
100. Ireland, M.L.; Willson, J.D.; Ballantyne, B.T.; Davis, I.M.C. Hip Strength in Females with and without Patellofemoral Pain. J.
Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 2003, 33, 671–676. [CrossRef]
101. Bellchamber, T.L.; Van Den Bogert, A.J. Contributions of Proximal and Distal Moments to Axial Tibial Rotation during Walking
and Running. J. Biomech. 2000, 33, 1397–1403. [CrossRef]
102. Feltner, M.; Macrae, H.; Macrae, P.; Turner, N.; Hartman, C.; Summers, M.; MD, W. Strength Training Effects on Rearfoot Motion
in Running. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1994, 26, 1021–1027. [CrossRef]
103. Snyder, K.R.; Earl, J.E.; O’Connor, K.M.; Ebersole, K.T. Resistance Training Is Accompanied by Increases in Hip Strength and
Changes in Lower Extremity Biomechanics during Running. Clin. Biomech. 2009, 24, 26–34. [CrossRef]
104. Mofﬁt, T.J.; Montgomery, M.M.; Lockie, R.G.; Pamukoff, D.N. Association between Knee- And Hip-Extensor Strength and
Running-Related Injury Biomechanics in Collegiate Distance Runners. J. Athl. Train. 2020, 55, 1262–1269. [CrossRef]

Sports 2022, 10, 98
15 of 16
105. Willy, R.W.; Davis, I.S. The Effect of a Hip-Strengthening Program on Mechanics during Running and during a Single-Leg Squat.
J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 2011, 41, 625–632. [CrossRef]
106. Noehren, B.; Scholz, J.; Davis, I. The Effect of Real-Time Gait Retraining on Hip Kinematics, Pain and Function in Subjects with
Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome. Br. J. Sports Med. 2011, 45, 691–696. [CrossRef]
107. Cheung, R.T.H.; An, W.W.; Au, I.P.H.; Zhang, J.H.; Chan, Z.Y.S.; MacPhail, A.J. Control of Impact Loading during Distracted
Running before and after Gait Retraining in Runners. J. Sports Sci. 2018, 36, 1497–1501. [CrossRef]
108. Da Silva Neto, W.C.; Lopes, A.D.; Ribeiro, A.P. Gait Retraining With Visual Biofeedback Reduces Rearfoot Pressure and Foot
Pronation in Recreational Runners. J. Sports Rehabil. 2022, 31, 165–173. [CrossRef]
109. Videbæk, S.; Bueno, A.M.; Nielsen, R.O.; Rasmussen, S. Incidence of Running-Related Injuries Per 1000 h of Running in Different
Types of Runners: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med. 2015, 45, 1017–1026. [CrossRef]
110. Kozinc, Ž.; Šarabon, N. Common Running Overuse Injuries and Prevention. Montenegrin J. Sports Sci. Med. 2017, 6, 67–74.
[CrossRef]
111. Cloosterman, K.L.A.; Fokkema, T.; de Vos, R.-J.; Visser, E.; Krastman, P.; IJzerman, J.; Koes, B.W.; Verhaar, J.A.N.; Bierma-Zeinstra,
S.M.A.; van Middelkoop, M. Educational Online Prevention Programme (the SPRINT Study) Has No Effect on the Number of
Running-Related Injuries in Recreational Runners: A Randomised-Controlled Trial. Br. J. Sports Med. 2022, 56, 676–682. [CrossRef]
112. Vincent, H.K.; Brownstein, M.; Vincent, K.R. Injury Prevention, Safe Training Techniques, Rehabilitation, and Return to Sport in
Trail Runners. Arthrosc. Sports Med. Rehabil. 2022, 4, e151–e162. [CrossRef]
113. Viljoen, C.; Janse van Rensburg, D.C.C.; van Mechelen, W.; Verhagen, E.; Silva, B.; Scheer, V.; Besomi, M.; Gajardo-Burgos, R.;
Matos, S.; Schoeman, M.; et al. Trail Running Injury Risk Factors: A Living Systematic Review. Br. J. Sports Med. 2022, 56, 577–587.
[CrossRef]
114. Mendez-Rebolledo, G.; Figueroa-Ureta, R.; Moya-Mura, F.; Guzmán-Muñoz, E.; Ramirez-Campillo, R.; Lloyd, R.S. The Protective
Effect of Neuromuscular Training on the Medial Tibial Stress Syndrome in Youth Female Track-and-Field Athletes: A Clinical
Trial and Cohort Study. J. Sports Rehabil. 2021, 30, 1019–10277. [CrossRef]
115. Pope, R.P.; Herbert, R.D.; Kirwan, J.D.; Graham, B.J. A Randomized Trial of Preexercise Stretching for Prevention of Lower- Limb
Injury. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2000, 32, 271–277. [CrossRef]
116. Grier, T.L.; Cnham-Chervak, M.; Anderson, M.K.; Bushman, T.T.; Jones, B.H. Effects of Physical Training and Fitness on Running
Injuries in Physically Activeyoung Men. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2014, 34, 207–216.
117. Brushøj, C.; Larsen, K.; Albrecht-Beste, E.; Nielsen, M.B.; Løye, F.; Hölmich, P. Prevention of Overuse Injuries by a Concurrent
Exercise Program in Subjects Exposed to an Increase in Training Load: A Randomized Controlled Trial of 1020 Army Recruits.
Am. J. Sports Med. 2008, 36, 663–670. [CrossRef]
118. Toresdahl, B.G.; McElheny, K.; Metzl, J.; Ammerman, B.; Chang, B.; Kinderknecht, J. A Randomized Study of a Strength Training
Program to Prevent Injuries in Runners of the New York City Marathon. Sports Health 2020, 12, 74–79. [CrossRef]
119. Taddei, U.T.; Matias, A.B.; Duarte, M.; Sacco, I.C.N. Foot Core Training to Prevent Running-Related Injuries: A Survival Analysis
of a Single-Blind, Randomized Controlled Trial. Am. J. Sports Med. 2020, 48, 3610–3619. [CrossRef]
120. Kelly, L.; Cresswell, A.; Farris, D. The Energetic Behaviour of the Human Foot across a Range of Running Speeds. Sci. Rep. 2018,
8, 10576. [CrossRef]
121. Taddei, U.T.; Matias, A.B.; Ribeiro, F.I.A.; Inoue, R.S.; Bus, S.A.; Sacco, I.C.N. Effects of a Therapeutic Foot Exercise Program on
Injury Incidence, Foot Functionality and Biomechanics in Long-Distance Runners: Feasibility Study for a Randomized Controlled
Trial. Phys. Ther. Sport 2018, 34, 216–226. [CrossRef]
122. Peterson, B.; Hawke, F.; Spink, M.; Sadler, S.; Hawes, M.; Callister, R.; Chuter, V. Biomechanical and Musculoskeletal Measure-
ments as Risk Factors for Running-Related Injury in Non-Elite Runners: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Prospective
Studies. Sports Med. Open 2022, 8, 38. [CrossRef]
123. Finnoff, J.T.; Hall, M.M.; Kyle, K.; Krause, D.A.; Lai, J.; Smith, J. Hip Strength and Knee Pain in High School Runners: A
Prospective Study. PM R 2011, 3, 792–801. [CrossRef]
124. Luedke, L.E.; Heiderscheit, B.C.; Williams, D.S.B.; Rauh, M.J. Association of Isometric Strength of Hip and Knee Muscles With
Injury Risk in High School Cross Country Runners. Int. J. Sports Phys. Ther. 2015, 10, 868–876.
125. Vannatta, C.; Kernozek, T. Normative Measures of Hip Strength and Relation to Previous Injury in Collegiate Cross-Country
Runners. J. Athl. Train. 2021, 56, 1072–1077. [CrossRef]
126. Mucha, M.D.; Caldwell, W.; Schlueter, E.L.; Walters, C.; Hassen, A. Hip Abductor Strength and Lower Extremity Running Related
Injury in Distance Runners: A Systematic Review. J. Sci. Med. Sport 2017, 20, 349–355. [CrossRef]
127. Fredericson, M.; Cookingham, C.L.; Chaudhari, A.M.; Dowdell, B.C.; Oestreicher, N.; Sahrmann, S.A. Hip Abductor Weakness in
Distance Runners with Iliotibial Band Syndrome. Clin. J. Sport Med. 2000, 10, 169–175. [CrossRef]
128. McKay, J.; Maffulli, N.; Aicale, R.; Taunton, J. Iliotibial Band Syndrome Rehabilitation in Female Runners: A Pilot Randomized
Study. J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 2020, 15, 1–8. [CrossRef]
129. Van Der Worp, M.P.; Van Der Horst, N.; De Wijer, A.; Backx, F.J.G.; Van Der Sanden, M.W.G.N. Iliotibial Band Syndrome in
Runners: A Systematic Review. Sports Med. 2012, 42, 969–992. [CrossRef]
130. Bolgla, L.A.; Malone, T.R.; Umberger, B.R.; Uhl, T.L. Hip Strength and Hip and Knee Kinematics during Stair Descent in Females
with and without Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 2008, 38, 12–18. [CrossRef]

Sports 2022, 10, 98
16 of 16
131. Mascal, C.L.; Landel, R.; Powers, C. Management of Patellofemoral Pain Function: 2 Case Reports. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther.
2003, 33, 647–660. [CrossRef]
132. Kalema, R.N.; Schache, A.G.; Williams, M.D.; Heiderscheit, B.; Trajano, G.S.; Shield, A.J. Sprinting Biomechanics and Hamstring
Injuries: Is There a Link? A Literature Review. Sports 2021, 9, 141. [CrossRef]
133. Yu, B.; Liu, H.; Garrett, W.E. Mechanism of Hamstring Muscle Strain Injury in Sprinting. J. Sport Health Sci. 2017, 6, 130–132.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Wan, X.; Li, S.; Best, T.M.; Liu, H.; Li, H.; Yu, B. Effects of Flexibility and Strength Training on Peak Hamstring Musculotendinous
Strains during Sprinting. J. Sport Health Sci. 2021, 10, 222–229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Raya-Gonzalez, J.; Castillo, D.; Clemente, F.M. Injury Prevention of Hamstring Injuries through Exercise Interventions. J. Sports
Med. Phys. Fitness 2021, 61, 1242–1251. [CrossRef]
136. Jayaseelan, D.J.; Moats, N.; Ricardo, C.R. Rehabilitation of Proximal Hamstring Tendinopathy Utilizing Eccentric Training,
Lumbopelvic Stabilization, and Trigger Point Dry Needling: 2 Case Reports. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 2014, 44, 198–205.
[CrossRef]
137. Hegedus, E.J.; Stern, B.; Reiman, M.P.; Tarara, D.; Wright, A.A. A Suggested Model for Physical Examination and Conservative
Treatment of Athletic Pubalgia. Phys. Ther. Sport 2013, 14, 3–16. [CrossRef]
138. Moran, M.W.; Rogowski, K.R. Hip and Pelvic Stability and Gait Retraining in the Management of Athletic Pubalgia and Hip
Labral Pathology in a Female Runner: A Case Report. Int. J. Sports Phys. Ther. 2020, 15, 1174–1183. [CrossRef]
139. Hutson, M.J.; O’Donnell, E.; Petherick, E.; Brooke-Wavell, K.; Blagrove, R.C. Incidence of Bone Stress Injury Is Greater in
Competitive Female Distance Runners with Menstrual Disturbances Independent of Participation in Plyometric Training. J. Sports
Sci. 2021, 39, 2558–2566. [CrossRef]
140. Kozinc, Ž.; Šarabon, N. Effectiveness of Movement Therapy Interventions and Training Modiﬁcations for Preventing Running
Injuries: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. J. Sports Sci. Med. 2017, 16, 421–428.
